# Run file for Castanea
# Generated on Rstudio by user vandermeersch, on the 2023-08-22

cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_1.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_2.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_3.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_4.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_5.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_6.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_7.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_8.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_9.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_10.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_11.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_12.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_13.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_14.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_15.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_16.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_17.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_18.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_19.txt
cd C:/Program Files/Java/scripts && java8.cmd && cd/d D:/applications/capsis4_castanea && setmem 2000 && capsis -clfd -p script castaneaonly.myscripts.Simulation_EU_Victor C:/Users/vandermeersch/Documents/CEFE/phd/hindcasting/simulation/castanea/run/ind1/commandfile_20.txt
